Now that you know how to compute the area under a curve using integrals it's time to learn how to compute
the area between two curves.
And the good part is that you basically already know how to do this.
It's a small extension of what I discussed in the previous videos on computing integrals and in particular
Definite integrals.
And I'll also give a reminder a review of how to draw patches in Python.
So let's get started.
This is a quick review from a few videos ago about introducing the integral.
So remember the idea is that if you want to compute the area under this curve then you create a bunch
of rectangles in here and then you sum up the areas of the rectangles and then basically you make these
rectangles thinner and thinner until they are infinitesimally thin.
And then here is the formula for that that I showed so this was the definite integral between point
A and Point B and F of X is the height of the bars of the rectangles and D X is the width of the rectangles.
Now this equation over here is just to show that I can rewrite this expression as this and this is really
nothing in particular special I'm just subtracting zero which basically means nothing.
So if you think of this line here as being zero you can call this a function where F of X or I already
call this f of x so let's call this G of X G of X is zero everywhere.
So at every value of x this function G of X is zero.
And that's really the key insight to computing the area between two curves.
So let's imagine we have these two functions here.
So then the question is how do we compute the area between these two curves here.
So not this area down here just this area in here.
Well the procedure is exactly the same.
You draw a bunch of rectangles but now the rectangles don't go all the way down to the bottom of the
graph.
They stop here and then the formula is basically just what I hinted at in the previous slide.
So you just say f of x minus G of X.
And so here this would be f of x.
This would be G of X.
Now which one you call f in which when you call G is pretty arbitrary.
Of course if you would swap these around if you would write the integral from A to B of G of X minus
F of X you're gonna get the same answer but then it's going to be negative.
So the sine has a little bit of an arbitrary nature to it.
Okay.
So let's switch to code now and I'm going to show you how to set up for solving a problem like this.
We are going to be using simple ie num pi matte plot lib pi plot and the display and math functions
although I think these are only going to come into play in the exercise.
Let's get started by creating two functions.
So these are both going to be functions of x.
So I will first create a symbolic variable X loops that should be like that.
Okay.
So let's say.
So we're gonna need to make these functions in simplify and then convert them into function so I'm going
to start by writing some f for function F and that's going to be X squared and then some gs of function
G.
That's just going to be x.
So this is going to be a fairly simple set of functions X squared of course looks like this and then
x is just as linear increase.
And now for plotting what I want to do is convert these from simple expressions into functions that
I can call and generate specific numbers for.
So for that then I'll call those variables F and G so f is going to be simple lambda fi and the key
variable is X and then the function or the expression is M F and then let's see I'll do a copy and paste
here that's going to be G.
All right.
So I just run this code and I didn't get any errors.
That's good.
So let's start by plotting this function.
So P L T dot plot and now actually what are we gonna plot.
Well we need to define an x value.
So I'll call it X X of course because I don't want to confuse it with this single x so x x will be linearly
spaced numbers.
How about we go from minus two to plus two in fifty.
How about fifty five steps.
Seems like a good number.
So plot x x by the function f evaluated at points x x and then on top of that we're gonna plot x x by
the function g evaluated at x x and I'll make sure that this is a red line.
So let's see what these two functions look like.
OK so here's are two functions this is X squared.
And this is X and you can see that they overlap a little bit here and this is the interesting region
that I want to compute the area of this little almost looks like a lip here.
Now of course that's arbitrary.
You don't have to compute the area between two functions where they intersect.
You could compute the area between these two functions.
Let's say here for whatever reason but you will see when we get to the exercise it's gonna be interesting
to see where these functions intersect.
Okay.
So therefore it seems like most of the area of this plot is taken up by space that we are not interested
in.
So I am going to change the axis to go from about minus point to five.
So somewhere basically here to around here on the x axis.
So then one point two five and on the y axis.
Let's try to be a little bit below here to a little bit above here.
So let's try a minus point five to one point five.
Okay that's good.
Now we can really zoom in to the key area here.
Now I want to put a legend so appeal to that legend.
And of course you could also put the label in these plot commands here but you know sometimes it's good
to change things up a bit just to you know prevent boredom.
So let's see.
I want this to be in latex.
So in between two dollar signs I'm going to write f of x equals percent s and that's going to be the
same pi since the late TEC of the function.
Remember this is not this function which I've lambda fired into a function that gets evaluated at discrete
points.
This is the simple I object for the function talking about coding can sometimes be a little confusing
because of all this terminal logical overloading you know I'm using the word function for this kind
of a function and then I create this function and then there's this function which is actually referring
to a calculus function of X..
But anyway that's just an ambiguity that you have to learn to live with.
So let's see.
So that was f of x and then we have G of X equals again a percent s and then percent since latex M G.
Okey dokey.
All right.
This looks good.
So as I mentioned in the exercise we are going to be computing the area between these two functions
using the intersection point.
So these points where they intersect now in the exercise we are going to use simplify to compute their
exact intersect points empirically but I think we can already just kind of look at these two functions
and figure out what are their intersection points.
So where does X equal X squared.
Well you can see I mean you can you can guess it but you can also look at the graph and and figure this
out.
So when x equals zero obviously zero equals zero squared.
And here where X equals one one equals one squared.
So these are the two intersection points that we are going to compute the area between.
So the boundaries.
So what I'd like to do now is add a patch here and I'm going to do that using a function from map plot
lib.
So from Matt.
Plot lib dot patches import the function called Paul the gun.
And so what we are going to do here run this cell again.
What we're gonna do here is draw a bunch of points that go all the way around from the top of the function
to the bottom of this or the polygon that we want and then we are going to add that as a patch on top
of this graph.
Okay.
So let's see how to do that ad patch.
So what we need to do is specify all the x axis coordinates and the y axis coordinates for the patch.
So let's call this X patch.
And that's going to be I'll set this as linearly spaced numbers between 0 and 1.
And how about 100 hundred of them.
I think that's going to give us a sufficient resolution for this curve down here of course for the top
curve.
We actually only need two points this value here at 1 0 and this value here at 1.
But for this bottom curve we want to make sure we have a sufficient number of points.
So then for the y coordinates of the patch this is going to be let me write up this function first and
then I'll get back and explain this.
So we want the function G of X evaluated at the X patch points and then we want F of X also evaluated
at these same x axis points.
So that's basically going to draw a bunch of points that in circles this patch.
Okay.
And then this needs to be transposed that's just about the order and then this function v stack is basically
just vertically stacking them together.
So let me actually show you what this variable will look like why patch.
Okay.
So here you see these are all of the functions for let's see what do we draw for G of X and then F of
X evaluated at the x axis points between 0 and 1.
Okay so we don't need these anymore.
And now what I'm going to do is just set up the patch of Fig X I have to set this up as a call to a
specific axis.
So it's gonna be so we need this function subplots although we're not actually generating any particular
subplots then I write X that add patch and then what I'm going to add is a polygon object so that looks
like this polygon.
That's the function that I just imported from the map.
Plot lib module and then I basically just input the Y patch coordinates.
So let's already try this code and see how it looks all right.
So that looks pretty interesting we see this blue patch here but I don't really like the patch being
blue.
I think this will look nicer if I make this have a face.
Color of black.
Okay.
But that's a little bit too black.
This looks like you know we've torn a hole in the universe here and we're kind of looking out into nothingness.
I would like to make this a little bit lighter and the way that I'm going to do that is by setting this
alpha parameter which is the transparency.
Two point three.
So essentially that makes it a black patch but it has 30 percent transparency on it.
Well you're probably wondering when do we get to the point where we actually compute the area between
those two functions within the boundaries of where the functions intersect.
That is the whole point of the exercise and that comes in the next video.
So keep watching.